docs: First cut draft of revised Tutorial - Relations, Filtering, Aggregation (#3088)
PrQL/prql: web/book/src/tutorial/filtering.md

# Filtering rows

In previous page we learned how `derive`, `select`, and `join`
add new columns and remove unwanted ones.

Now we will look into how we can manipulate rows of a table
using `filter` and `take`.

> **filter:** The `filter` transform picks (passes through) rows based on their values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**filter:** The `filter` transform picks rows based on their values:
```

I'm not sure `picks` is great either, but `passes through` seems not great, given its role is to not pass things through? "selectively passes through"??

Author: I'll change it to say, "... picks the rows to pass through..." in this first description, then use "picks" thereafter. Same for `take`

```
from invoices
filter billing_city == "Berlin"
```

The resulting table contains all the rows that came from Berlin.

PRQL converts the single `filter` transform to use the SQL `WHERE` or `HAVING` command,
depending on where it appears in the pipeline it is used.

> **take:** The `take` transform passes through rows based on their position within the relation (table).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**take:** The `take` transform selects rows based on their position within the relation (table).
```
?

Author: same comment as above

The position (the set of rows) can be specified in two ways:

- a plain number `x`, which will pick the first `x` rows, or
- an inclusive range of rows `start..end`.

```
from invoices
take 4
```

```
from invoices
take 4..7
```

Of course, it is possible combine all these transforms into a single pipeline:

```
from invoices

# retain only rows for orders from Berlin
filter billing_city == "Berlin"

# skip first 10 rows and take the next 10
take 11..20

# take only first 3 rows of *that* result
take 3

> ```

Reviewer: Nice!

Author: Tricky using the data from the `invoices` table. The largest number of rows for any city is 14. So `take 11..20` really only gets 14 rows...

We did something a bit odd at the end: first we took rows `11..20` and
then took the first 3 rows from that result.
Although this could have been done in a single
transform `take 11..13`, this is a nice example of how
PRQL allows fast data exploration.

> You have the

Reviewer: I think we should try and keep a consistent voice, and one way I've found to do that is to never use "You", only use a descriptive voice...

Author: Busted! :-) Thanks.

freedom to stack transforms on top of each other, without worrying about
interactions of a new transform with the previous query.
When PRQL compiles these two statements/transforms
(`take 11..20` and `take 3`) to SQL, it produces the same result as `take 11..13`.

> Side note: each of the transform functions has at least some invariant: `select`
> and `derive` will not change the number of rows, `filter` and `take` will not change
> the number of columns. We call this separation of effects "transform
> orthogonality". Its goal is to keep transform functions composable by

> > minimizing interference of their effects.

Reviewer: If we do want to keep this (I might move to reference), then we can put in an admonish block

Reviewer 2: It's half way between design justification and something that it is nice to know so you can rely on it.

Maybe it should be made more of the latter.

And yes, admonish.

Author: Yes, let's move to the reference section

>
> In SQL, you can see this lack of invariant when an aggregation function is
> used in the `SELECT` clause. Before, the number of rows was kept constant, but
> introduction of an aggregation function caused the whole statement to produce

> > only one row (per group). _I don't understand the importance of this paragraph -richb-hanover_

Reviewer: I kinda agree with @richb-hanover — is this good for the tutorial?

Reviewer 2: No, it's a bash at SQL :D And definitely a design justification -> to the reference.

Author: OK by me :-)
